Welcome everyone to this lecture on evaluating performance particularly for classification problems
in the next lecture.
We'll discuss evaluating performance for regression protests so we just learned that after a machine
learning process is complete we're going to be using performance metrics to evaluate how our model actually
did.
And we keep mentioning the fact that we train our model on the training data and then we're gonna use
some sort of metric to actually see how it performed on the test set or the validation set.
So let's go ahead and discuss what that actually means.
What classification metrics are we going to be using and the key classification metrics we should be
understanding our accuracy recall precision and f1 score but first we should understand the reasoning
behind these metrics and how they will actually work in the real world typically in any classification
task your model can actually really only achieve two results either your model was correct in its prediction
or your model was incorrect in its prediction and all classification metrics stem from this idea now
fortunately incorrect versus correct also expands to situations where you have multiple classes such
as trying to predict categories of more than two.
For example you have Category A B C D You can either be correct in predicting the correct category or
incorrect in predicting the right category.
Now for the purpose of explaining the metrics we're gonna go ahead and simplify this to what's known
as a binary classification situation binary meaning two.
So there's only two available classes either class 0 or Class 1.
And this idea is going to expand to multiple classes as well.
But for simplification let's imagine just a binary classification situation so in our example we're
going to attempt to predict if an image is a dog or a cat will actually perform this task later on during
the convolution all neural network portion of this course.
Now since it's a supervised learning problem where we're gonna need to do first is fit or train a model
on training data.
That means we're gonna have images that someone's already gone ahead and labeled dog or cat.
So we know the correct answer on these images then we're going to test that model on the testing data.
So we're gonna show new images that the model hasn't seen before.
Get the models prediction and then compare the results of the model prediction to the correct answer
that we already know.
So once we have the models predictions from X test data we compare it to the true y values.
The correct labels so let's actually diagram this process out.
Let's imagine we've already trained our model on some training data and now it's time to actually evaluate
the models performance.
This is where our test dataset comes in.
So we take a test image from where we're going to label x test X meaning feature.
So the actual image itself is a feature and this is from the test set and there is a corresponding correct
label from Y test.
So we have the feature or image X and that's the test image and we also have the correct label from
Y test.
And in this case we can see that this image is an image of a dog.
So we're going to do is we're just going to feed in the features.
In this case the image into our already trained model and then the model is going to make some prediction.
So the model predicts that this is a dog and then what we do is we compare the prediction to the correct
label.
So this dog equal dog in this case it was correct however maybe it predicted that this image was a cat.
And in this case this comparison to the correct label would be incorrect.
And these are essentially just the only two situations.
Either you're right or you're wrong correct or incorrect so we're repeat this process for all the images
in our x test data.
And at the end we will have a count of correct matches and account of incorrect matches.
And the key realization here that we need to make is that in the real world not all incorrect or correct
matches hold equal value.
So let's kind of hone in on what we mean by that so in the real world a single metric won't tell the
complete story and to understand all this let's bring back those four metrics we mentioned and see how
they're actually calculated.
We could organize our predicted values compared to the real values and what is known as a confusion
matrix so we'll touch upon the confusion matrix later on.
But first let's talk about accuracy accuracy is one of the most common classification metrics.
And luckily it's also the easiest to understand.
It's just really intuitive what it's measuring accuracy and classification problems is the number of
correct predictions made by the model divided by the number of or the total number of predictions.
So again it's the number of correct predictions divided by the total number of predictions essentially
answering the questions how many predictions does you get right as a percentage so for example let's
imagine that X test set was 100 images and our model correctly predicted 80 images.
Then we have 80 divided by 100 or zero point eight or 80 percent accuracy and accuracy is really useful
when the target classes are well balanced.
So what does that mean.
Well balanced well in our example.
That would mean we have roughly the same amount of cat images as we have dog images throughout our data.
So it means the actual labels themselves are roughly equally represented in the dataset but let's imagine
that we have what's known as an unbalanced class situation.
In this case accuracy is actually not a good metric to use.
So let's do a little thought experiment.
Let's imagine that in this test set we had ninety nine images of dogs and only one image of a cat.
Now if our model was simply a line that just always predicted dog no matter what image it saw then we
would actually get ninety nine percent accuracy on this particular test set because by just always saying
dog ninety nine images are dogs and one images of a cat then we only missed one.
So that's why you have to be aware of the downside of accuracy and the downside really comes when you
have an unbalanced class situation.
If your classes are roughly balanced then accuracy is a very nice intuitive method or a metric to understand.
However if you have an unbalanced class you can see in this particular situation where it starts to
represent a problem and that's where the other metrics come into play.
So again in this situation will want to understand recall and precision that helps us understand how
well it's performing on unbalanced classes recall is the ability of a model to find all the relevant
cases within a dataset and the precise definition of recall is the number of what's known as true positives
and we'll kind of hone in on that later when we see the confusion matrix.
But it's the number of true positives divided by the number of true positives plus the number of false
negatives and the precision is the ability of a classification model to identify only the relevant data
points where precision is defined as the number of true positives divided by the number of true positives
plus a number of false positives now.
Often you have a tradeoff between recall and precision while recall expresses the ability to find all
the relevant instances in a dataset precision expresses the proportion of the data points our model
says was relevant that actually were relevant and then F1 one score is essentially a combination of
these two.
In cases where we want to find optimal blend of precision and recall we can combine the two metrics
using what is known as the F1 score and the F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall taking
both metrics into account in the following equation.
So this isn't just taking the average of record precision it's taking the harmonic mean of them.
And so here we have the formula for F1 score or F1 scores equal to two times.
Precision times recall in the numerator and then divided by precision plus recall in the denominator
so the reason we use the harmonic mean instead of just a simple mean or simple average is because it's
going to punish extreme values.
For example if you created a classifier that had a position of 1 meaning essentially perfect precision
and a recall of zero essentially the worst record possible.
If you were just to take the simple average of this then it would be zero point five.
But the F1 score because it's taken a harmonic mean we have precision times recall there at the top
which means you get zero times one of the top and you get an F1 score of zero.
So this is really nice because it lets you punish extreme differences between the precision and recall
so gives you kind of a fair assessment of that tradeoff between precision and recall.
Now we can also view all correct classified versus incorrectly classified images in the form of a confusion
matrix.
So confusing matrix looks something like this.
We have the underlying true conditions.
That's the true correct label and we can think of condition as positive or negative such as actually
being a dog or not being a dog or oftentimes is used in a medical diagnosis such as having presence
of a disease versus not having presence of a disease and then we have the models predicted condition.
So prediction positive or prediction negative and I think when it comes to confusion matrices it's often
easiest to first get an intuition if you think of this as a diagnostic test for having some sort of
disease present in a person after maybe you take a blood sample and run it through your model.
So for example a true positive would be someone actually having that disease and your model correctly
predicting that they have it a true negative would be someone not having the disease and your model
predicting correctly that they do not have the disease.
So have true positives and true negatives and those are both correct predictions and then we have essentially
these two types of incorrect predictions a false positive and a false negative a false positive would
be if the person doesn't have the disease and you predict that they do have it that's a false positive
because you're falsely saying that they are positive for this disease or this condition a false negative
is essentially the opposite of that where this person does have the disease present and then you report
back using your model and your test that it's actually negative they don't actually have this disease
and these are also sometimes called and statistics a type 1 error and a type 2 error and then off of
these essentially true positive true negatives false negatives and false positives results.
There's a lot of other metrics you can calculate so we can see some of them here such as on the bottom
left corner we can see the actual calculation for accuracy it's the sum of true positives plus true
negatives essentially the sum of what you got correct over the total population and there's a bunch
of other ones like positive likelihood ratio false positive rate true positive rate prevalence false
discovery rate etc
now the main point to remember here is that the confusion matrix and the various calculated metrics
is essentially they're all fundamentally ways of comparing the predicted value versus the true values
and what constitutes good metrics actually really depends on the specific situation.
A really common question I get from students is hey is this a good enough accuracy.
Well that really depends on your situation and the context of the situation.
Now if you're still confusing the confusion matrix it's no problem.
Check out the wikipedia page for it.
It has a really good diagram with all the foremost for all the metrics and throughout the training then
this course were usually just going to print out metrics such as printing out basic accuracy.
Now before we finish off this lecture I want to go back to that initial question I mentioned that students
ask me all the time which is this idea of what is a good enough accuracy.
And as always this really depends on the context of the situation you're running your model in.
There's no single number I can give.
To say something like 90 percent accuracy is good enough for every situation.
We already saw the issue with unbalanced classes but there's also not really good remark I can give
for what is a good enough precision or recall and we have to think of the context of the situation.
So let's think back on maybe that model that is diagnostic for predicting the presence of a disease.
So if we created a model to predict the presence of a disease first thing want to think about is are
we going to have balance classes or unbalanced classes.
So is the disease presence well-balanced in the general population and in pretty much most cases it's
probably not.
There's probably not a disease that's going to happen where about half the population is affected and
half the population is not affected.
So we can already tell we're gonna have an unbalanced class situation which means we're gonna have a
precision recall tradeoff so we should also keep in mind that often these models are used as quick diagnostic
tests to have before having a more invasive test.
For example for prostate cancer models it's really common to just do a simple urine test before getting
a biopsy because it's much easier to just get your urine tested than going through a full biopsy on
the prostate.
So we also need to consider then what is at stake if it's prostate cancer.
The stakes are actually quite high.
So as we mentioned we often have that precision recall tradeoff which means we essentially need to decide
if the model should focus on fixing false positives versus false negatives.
So at the cost of decreasing false negatives.
Most likely we increase false positives and vice versa.
And in disease diagnosis it's probably better to try to minimize the number of false negatives at the
cost of increasing the number of false positives.
So it goes in the direction of these false positives.
And why do we actually want to do that.
Well we want to make sure we correctly classify as many cases of the disease as possible.
So at the cost of increasing false positives we try our best to decrease false negatives.
In this context of disease diagnosis and why would we actually want to do that.
Well we want to make sure that anyone that actually has some sort of presence of this disease or in
this case of this example prostate cancer.
If we're doing that urine test we wanna make sure that all those people to have the presence of the
disease will actually go through to the next step.
That is maybe a more invasive tests like a biopsy.
And remember this kind of usually comes at a cost of increasing those false positives.
So our models aren't gonna be perfect and eventually it's going to happen as someone who doesn't have
the disease when we do our simple urine test or whatever our machine learning model is it's going to
predict back that hey I'm sorry but you have the positive presence of this disease and it will be an
error because it will be a false positive.
However then when they get then more invasive tests then they'll realize Oh sorry it was a false positive.
You're actually OK.
You don't have this disease and that comes because we're trying to minimize the false negatives.
What we really don't want when it comes as something as important as having cancer or having a disease
we really don't want to turn someone away who actually has a disease and tell them they don't have the
disease.
So be a false negative when it comes to disease diagnosis.
That's something we really want to minimize.
We want to minimize those false negatives so we don't accidentally miss someone right off the bat with
our diagnostic tool and tell them oh you don't have the disease or you don't have cancer when they actually
do have it.
So we can see for something as important as disease diagnosis really minimizing those false negatives
becomes really important and pretty much all of this is to say machine learning is not going to be performed
in a vacuum.
And these performance metrics don't have some sort of universal truth that is true across all problems
but machine learning is that it's a really collaborative process where we should always be consulting
of experts in the domain.
For example in the case of disease diagnosis we should probably be talking to metal cola doctors as
far as what our acceptable standards for false negatives versus false positives.
But as a general presence of this disease in the general population et cetera and this is going to change
depending on the context of your situation so always keep that in mind.
There's not gonna be an easy answer for me to say is this a good enough accuracy precision or recall
because it all depends on the context and the domain of the situation.
Okay so we just talked about how we can evaluate classification models.
Let's go ahead and move on to the next lecture where we discuss evaluating regression tasks.
I'll see you there.